Hi, I am Matthias Müller, a physics researcher at nvidia.

I have been working as a researcher in the field of physics based simulation in computer graphics for over 20 years now. 

Over the years my colleagues and I have come up with a variety of methods to simulate rigid and soft bodies, cloth, water, smoke, sand and their interaction.

These methods have become popular in both the gaming and the movie industry. 

I have always had three main goals in mind. 

- Simplicity, Robustness and Speed.

- Simplicity means the methods are easy to understand and implement
- Robustness means that the methods produce realistic simulations even under unphysical or crazy setups.
- Speed means that the methods can be used in real-time applications such as computer games.

If you look for simulation methods in research articles and books you most likely find quite complicated formulations that only a small percentage of the people interested in physical simulations understand.

Fortunately, physics is quite simple at its heard. I am talking about the physics of everyday objects. Everything around us is made of simple particles - the atoms - and simple forces between them. 

The difference between a rigid body, cloth and water is just how the particles are arranged and the strength of the forces that hold them together.

Therefore, it should be possible to simulate everyday object with simple methods and this is indeed the case.

-------------------

In this channel I will show you how easy it is to write simulations of rigid bodies, soft bodies, cloth, water, sand and their mutual interaction.

Setting up development environments, libraries and creating applications that work multiple platforms used to be difficult. 

Fortunately, this has become super simple too. This fact was the main reason for me to create this channel.

We will use javascript embedded in webpages to write and test simulations.

All we need is a text editor and a browser. We will write the programs into one html document, drop it into a browser and have fun.

And you can try out what we implement on all platforms, pcs, tablets and cellphones, Android, Windows, MacOs and Linux.

I will use the free Visual Studio Code editor from Microsoft. 

This great tool makes writing javascript very easy 

with code completion, syntax highlighting and error checking.

As browser I will use Google Chrome because I like its built in debugger.

----------------------

After this short introduction, let us dive right into our first project - the simulation of a cannonball.


