Hi, I am Matthias Müller. 

I have been a researcher in the field of physics based simulation in computer graphics for 20 years now. 

In this channel I will show you how to write simulations for a wide variety of objects such as 

rigid bodies, soft bodies, cloth, water, sand and their mutual interaction 

and this in only a few minutes in each case. 

There are two main ingredients that make this possible.



The first is the simulation method.

Over the years my colleagues and I have developed a method we call position based dynamics or PBD.

This method makes it very easy to write simulations and the resulting simulations are very robust.

In the beginning this came at the price of reduced accuracy.

Therefore the method was mainly used in games and movies.

Furtnately we have found a very simple extension that fixes these problems. 

Extended Position Based Dynamics or XPBD has become an alternative to methods used in engineering.




The second ingedient that makes these short episodes possible is Javascript.

It has never been as easy as with javascript embedded in webpages to write and test simulations.

All we need is a text editor and a browser. We will write the programs into one html document, drop it into a browser and have fun.

And you can try out what we implement on all platforms, pcs, tablets and cellphones, Android, Windows, MacOs and Linux.


I will use the free Visual Studio Code editor from Microsoft. 

This great tool makes writing javascript very easy 

with code completion, syntax highlighting and error checking.

As browser I will use Google Chrome because I like its built in debugger.

At first I tried to write code live but found that it is combersome and a bit annoying not just for me but for you as audience as well. 

Instead I will copy paste small blocks. This way, the programs still develops 

but I have more time to explain the code and get rid of typing mistakes.

After this short introduction, let us dive right into our first project - the simulation of a cannonball.


